TKG(1.5)-airgap on aws Reference Design and Deployment Guide (#180)
vmware-tanzu-labs/tanzu-validated-solutions: src/reference-designs/tko-on-aws-airgap.md

# VMware Tanzu Kubernetes Grid on AWS Airgapped Reference Design

VMware Tanzu Kubernetes Grid (multi-cloud) provides a consistent, upstream-compatible, regional Kubernetes substrate that is ready for end-user workloads and ecosystem integrations.

This document lays out a reference design for deploying VMware Tanzu for Kubernetes Grid on AWS Networking in an airgapped environment with Tanzu components on AWS. An airgapped environment is a network security measure employed to ensure that a computer or computer network is secure by physically isolating it from unsecured networks, such as the public internet or an unsecured local area network. This reference design is based on the architecture and components described in [Tanzu Solution Reference Architecture Overview](index.md).

![Tanzu Edition reference design diagram](./img/tko-on-aws-airgap/tkg-aws-airgap-overview.png)

## Tanzu Kubernetes Grid Infrastructure Network Overview

> The following network diagram shows the network layout used with this reference design. It shows the layout for a single virtual private cloud (VPC). The network layout uses the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The network layout described in this reference design is for a single virtual private cloud (VPC) as depicted in the following network diagram. This network layout uses the following:
```

* One private subnet for each AWS availability zone (AZ). Each subnet is allocated a private IP address.
 
* A bootstrap VM running within your internet-restricted (offline) VPC to install Tanzu Kubernetes Grid.

*  A private Docker-compatible container registry such as Harbor, Docker, or Artifactory installed and configured. This registry runs outside of Tanzu Kubernetes Grid and is separate from any registry deployed as a shared service for clusters.

![TKGm AWS network overview diagram](./img/tko-on-aws-airgap/tkg-aws-airgap-network.png)

### Network Recommendations

This reference design uses the Tanzu Kubernetes Grid to manage the lifecycle of multiple Kubernetes workload clusters by bootstrapping a Kubernetes management cluster with the Tanzu command-line tool. Consider the following when configuring the network for Tanzu Kubernetes Grid:
* Create internet-restricted VPCs with no internet gateway (“offline VPCs”) for Tanzu Kubernetes Grid management and workload clusters. The Admin/Operator should be able to access/ssh into internet-restricted (offline) VPCs.

> * Create an AWS Transit Gateway for a network architecture with multiple VPCs with multiple Availability Zones. <_Revised because wording was awkward. Is new wording correct?_> Thw AWS Transit Gateway connects all your VPCs and on-premises networks through a central hub. This simplifies your network and avoids complex peering relationships. The AWS Transit Gateway acts as a cloud router – each new connection is made only once.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Create an AWS Transit Gateway for a network architecture with multiple VPCs with multiple Availability Zones. The AWS Transit Gateway connects all your VPCs and on-premises networks through a central hub. This architecture simplifies your network and avoids complex peering relationships. The AWS Transit Gateway acts as a cloud router – each new connection is made only once.
```

> <_Changed the following to reduce redundancy_>

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

* Use an internal load balancer scheme. A best practice is to create an internal load balancer to avoid exposing the Kubernetes API server to the public Internet. To use an internal load balancer, include the following setting in the cluster configuration file:
   `AWS_LOAD_BALANCER_SCHEME_INTERNAL: true` 
If you use an internal load balancer, run Tanzu Kubernetes Grid from a machine with access to the target VPC private IP space.

> * Beware that 172.17.0.0/16 is the default Docker subnet. If you are going to use that subnet for a VPC deployment, you must change the subnet for your Docker container.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Note that 172.17.0.0/16 is the default Docker subnet. If you plan to use that subnet for a VPC deployment, you must change the subnet for your Docker container.
```

## Storage

Tanzu Kubernetes Grid ships with the AWS cloud storage driver, which allows you to provision stateful storage volumes in your Tanzu Kubernetes Grid cluster. The following storage classes are available:

  * gp2 - General Purpose SSD (default storage class)
  * io1 - IOPS provisioned SSD
  * st1 - Throughput Optimized HHD
  * sc1 - Cold HDD

For more information on available storage options, see [Amazon EBS volume types](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/ebs-volume-types.html).  

## VPC Architectures
In a production deployment, Tanzu Kubernetes Grid creates multiple Availability Zones (AZs).

VMware recommends that you create the VPCs before you deploy Tanzu Kubernetes Grid. Also, make sure that you tag a private subnet in each AZ, including the control plane cluster, with a key of `kubernetes.io/cluster/<cluster_name>`. As a best practice, ensure that the value you use for the private subnets for an AZ can easily identify the subnets as belonging to the same AZ. For example:

<_I changed formatting below so that long line would wrap._>

> ` aws ec2 create-subnet --vpc-id $vpcId --cidr-block <ip_address>  --availability-zone ${AWS_REGION}b  --tag-specifications ‘ResourceType=subnet, Tags=[{Key=Name,Value=priv-b}]’ --output json > $WORKING_DIR/subnet-priv-b `

Reviewer: ```suggestion
` ``
aws ec2 create-subnet --vpc-id $vpcId --cidr-block <ip_address>  --availability-zone ${AWS_REGION}b  --tag-specifications ‘ResourceType=subnet, Tags=[{Key=Name,Value=priv-b}]’ --output json > $WORKING_DIR/subnet-priv-b `
```

All internet-restricted VPCs must add the following endpoints to enable private connections between the VPCs and supported AWS services.

> **Service endpoints:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Required Service Endpoints for Airgapped VPCs**
```

The Tanzu Kubernetes Grid management cluster performs [Machine Health Checks](https://cluster-api.sigs.k8s.io/tasks/healthcheck.html) on all Kubernetes worker VMs.  This ensures that workloads remain in a functional state, and can remediate issues such as:

  * a worker VM is accidentally deleted or corrupted.
  * the Kubelet process on a worker VM is accidentally stopped or corrupted.

These health checks ensure that your worker capacity remains stable and can be scheduled for workloads. These health checks, however, do not apply to the control plane or to the load balancer VMs.

### Quotas

It is essential to provide sufficient quotas to support both the management cluster and the workload clusters in your deployment. Otherwise, the cluster deployments will fail. Depending on the number of workload clusters you deploy, you may need to increase the AWS services quotas from their default values in every region in which you deploy Tanzu Kubernetes Grid.

The number of VPCs depends on the VPC architecture you select. The following table indicates the number of VPCs for the network architectures in the network diagrams shown above.

**VPC Architecture** | **Number of VPCs**

> -----|-----

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-----|:-----:
```
Changed alignment of 2nd column

 **vSphere** | **AWS**  | **Azure**
 -----|-----|-----
</br>- Ubuntu 20.04</br>- Ubuntu 18.04</br>- RHEL 7</br>- Photon OS 3|</br>- Ubuntu 20.04</br> - Ubuntu 18.04</br>- Amazon Linux 2|</br>- Ubuntu 20.04</br>- Ubuntu 18.04

For additional information on building custom images for TKG, see the Tanzu Kubernetes Grid [Build Machine Images](https://docs.vmware.com/en/VMware-Tanzu-Kubernetes-Grid/1.5/vmware-tanzu-kubernetes-grid-15/GUID-build-images-index.html) documentation for the applicable operating system:

* [Linux Custom Machine Images](https://docs.vmware.com/en/VMware-Tanzu-Kubernetes-Grid/1.5/vmware-tanzu-kubernetes-grid-15/GUID-build-images-linux.html)
* [Windows Custom Machine Images](https://docs.vmware.com/en/VMware-Tanzu-Kubernetes-Grid/1.5/vmware-tanzu-kubernetes-grid-15/GUID-build-images-windows.html)

## Tanzu Kubernetes Clusters Networking
A Tanzu Kubernetes cluster provisioned by the Tanzu Kubernetes Grid supports two Container Network Interface (CNI) options: 
* [Antrea](https://antrea.io/) 
* [Calico](https://www.tigera.io/project-calico/)

> Both are open-source software that provides networking for cluster pods, services, and ingress.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Both are open-source software that provides networking for cluster pods, services, and ingress.
```

To provision a Tanzu Kubernetes cluster using a non-default CNI, see Deploy [Tanzu Kubernetes clusters with calico](https://docs.vmware.com/en/VMware-Tanzu-Kubernetes-Grid/1.5/vmware-tanzu-kubernetes-grid-15/GUID-tanzu-k8s-clusters-networking.html#calico)

Each CNI is suitable for a different use case. The following table lists some common use cases for the two CNIs that Tanzu Kubernetes Grid supports. The information in this table will help you select the right CNI in your Tanzu Kubernetes Grid implementation.

>  **CNI** | **Use Case**  | **Pros and Cons**

Reviewer: ```suggestion

 **CNI** | **Use Case**  | **Pros and Cons**
```

* **Grafana** is an open-source visualization and analytics software. It allows you to query, visualize, alert on, and explore your metrics no matter where they are stored. Grafana is responsible for visualizing Prometheus metrics without the need to manually write the PromQL queries. You can create custom charts and graphs in addition to the pre-packaged options.
Both Prometheus and Grafana are installed via user-managed Tanzu packages by creating the deployment manifests and invoking the kubectl command to deploy the packages in the Tanzu Kubernetes clusters.

The following diagram shows how the monitoring components on a cluster interact.

![Monitoring Workflow](./img/tko-on-aws-airgap/monitor-workflow.png)

You can use out-of-the-box Kubernetes dashboards or you can create new dashboards to monitor compute/network/storage utilization of Kubernetes objects such as Clusters, Namespaces, Pods, etc. See the sample dashboards shown below:

Namespace (Pods) Compute Resources Utilization Dashboard

![Resources Utilization Dashboard](./img/tko-on-aws-airgap/gra-resource-utli.png)

> Namespace (Pods) Networking Utilization Dashboard

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Namespace (Pods) Networking Utilization Dashboard**
```

![Networking Utilization Dashboard](./img/tko-on-aws-airgap/gra-network-util.png)

> API Server Availability Dashboard

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**API Server Availability Dashboard**
```

![API Server Availability Dashboard](./img/tko-on-aws-airgap/gra-api-server-avail.png)

> Cluster Compute Resources Utilization Dashboard

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Cluster Compute Resources Utilization Dashboard**

```
